\

I

~

<fo

iro~"-(v;i)04/0007 /2003-09

REGISTERED NO. DL-(N)04/0007/2003-09

em

~h~ <5a:ette: of ~"'

31BT'!::fRUT

EXTRAORDINARY
1
'IWT 11- ~
pAin ll- Section 1
mf~~~

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

~o 1]
No.ll

~~,

,,!\'?~r<:1cm, ~

14, 201O/24~,

1931

NEW DELHI, THURSDAY,

JANUARY 14,2010/24

Pausa, 1931

~ wr-q~.1fIiO~~~~~%<W31Wl~cf;~-qWT\jfT~1

Separate

paging is given to this Part

in order

that

it may be filed as a separate

compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE

(Legislative Department)

. New Delhi, the 14th Jimuary, 20 I O/Pausa 24, ] 93] (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament

received

the assent of the President

on the

13th] anuary, 20 I0, and is hereby published for general

information:-

THE LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009

(No.1 OF 2010)

[I 3th Janumy, 2010 ]

AnAct

to establish and enforce standards of weights and measures,

regulate trade
and commerce
and other goods which are sold or
distributed by weight, measure or number and for matters connected therewith
or incidental

in weights, measures

thereto.

BE it enacted by Parliament

in the Sixtieth Year ofthe Republic oflndia as follows:- 

CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) ThisAct may be called the Legal Metrology Act, 2009.

.(2) It extends to the whole of India.

title, ex 
and com 

Short
tent
mencemcnT.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions
of this Act.

2.

In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-

Definitions

(a) "Controller" means the Controller of Legal Metrology appointed under

section 14;

(b) "dealer",
on, directly or otherwise,

in relation to any weight or measure, means a person who, carries
the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing

2

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II-

any such weight or measure, whether for cash or for deferred payment or for commission,
remuneration or other valuable consideration;
and includes a commission agent, an
importer, a manufacturer, who sells, supplies, distributes or otherwise delivers any
weight or measure manufactured by him to any person other than a dealer;

(c) "Director" means the Director

of Legal Metrology

appointed

under

section 13;

(d)'''export'' with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means

taking out ofIndia to a place 'outside India;

(e) "import" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means

bringing into India from a place outside India;

(j) "label" means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter affixed

to, or appearing upon any pre-packaged commodity;

(g) "Legal Metrology" means that part of metrology which treats units of
weighment and measurement, methods of weighment and measurement and weighing
and measuring
and legal
requirements which have the object of ensur.ing public guarantee from the point of
view of security and accuracy of the weighments and measurements;

to the mandatory

instruments,

in relation

technical

(h) "legal metrology officer" means Additional Director, Additional Controller,
Joint Director, Joint Controller, Deputy Director, Deputy Controller, Assistant Director,
Assistant Controller

and Inspector appointed under sections 13 and 14;

(i) "manufacturer"

in relation to any weight or measure, means a person who  

(i) manufactures weight or measure,

(ii) manufactures one or more parts, and acquires other parts, of such
to

weight or measure and, after assembling those parts, claims the end product
be a weight or measure manufactured by himself or itself, as the case may be,

(iii) does not manufacture

assembles parts thereof manufactured by others and claims the end product
be a weight or measure manufactured by himself or itself, as the case may be,

any part of such weight or measure but
to

(iv) puts, or causes to be put, his own mark on any complete weight or
to

measure made or manufactured by any other person and claims such product

be a weight or measure made or manufactured by himself or itself, as the case
may be;

(j) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;

(k) "protection" means the utilisation of reading obtained from any weight or
measure,
for the purpose of determining any step which is required to be taken to
safeguard the well-being of any human being or animal, or to protect any commodity,
vegetation br thing, whether individually or collectively;

(f) "pre-packaged commodity" means a commodity which without the purchaser
is placed in a package of whatever nature, whether sealed or not, so that

being present
the product contained therein has a pre-determined quantity;

(m) "person" includes,-

(i) a Hindu undivided family,

(ii) every department or office,

(iii) every organisation established or constituted by Government,

(iv) every local authority within the territory ofIndia,

(v) a company, firm and association of individuals,

(vi)

trust constituted under an Act,

-

SEe. I]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

3

(vii) every co-operative society, constituted under an Act,

(viii) every other society registered

under

the Societies Registration

2101'1860.

Act, 1860;

(n) "premises" includes-

(i) a place where any business,

is
carried on by a person, whether by himself or through an agent, by whatever
including the person who carries on the business in such premises,
name called,

industry, production

or transaction

(ii) a warehouse, godown or other place where any weight or measure or

other goods are stored or exhibited,

(iii) a place where any books of account or other documents pertaining to

any trade or transaction are kept,

(iv) a dwelling house, if any part thereof is used for the purpose of carrying

on any business,

industry, production or trade,

(v) a vehicle or vessel or any other mobile device, with the help of which

any transaction or business is carried on;

(0) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(P) "repairer" means a person who repairs a weight or measure and includes a
person who adjusts, cleans,
lubricates or paints any weight or measure or renders any
other service to such weight or measure to ensure that such weight or measure conforms
to the standards established by or under this Act;

(q) "State Government",

in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator

thereof;

(r) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means transfer

of property in any weight, measure or other goods by one person .to another for cash
or fordeferred payment or for any other valuable consideration a~d includes a transfer
system or any other
of any weight, measure or other goods on the hire-purchase
system of payment by instalments, but does not include a mortgage or hypothecation
of, or a charge or pledge on, such weight, measure or other goods;

(s) "seal" means a device or process by which a stamp is made, and includes any

wire or other accessory which is used for ensuring the integrity of any stamp;

(t) "stamp" means a mark, made by impr~ssing, casting, engraving, etching,
in relation to, any

branding, affixing pre-stressed paper seal or any other process
weight or measure with a view to-

(i) certifYing that such weight or measure conforms

to the standard

specified by or under this Act, or

(ii) indicating that any mark which was previously made thereon certifYing
that such weight Or measure conforms to the standards specified by or under
this Act, has been obliterated;

(u) "transaction" means,-

(i) any contract, whether for sale, purchase, exchange or any other purpose,

or

(ii) any assessment of royalty, toll, duty or other dues, or

(iii) the assessment of any work done, wages due or services rendered;

-

Provisions
tll is Act

of
to

override
Sions
other

of
law.

provi 
any

Units

of

weights
measures
based

and
to be
on met 

riC system.

Base

twit

of

weights
measures.

and

4

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II--

in relation to any weight or measure,

(v) "verification", with its grammatical variations

and cognate expressions,
includes,
the process of comparing, checking,
testing or adjusting such weight or measure with a view to ensuring that such weight
or measure conforms
this Act and also
includes re-verification and calibration;

to the standards established

by or under

(w) "weight or measure" means a weight or measure specified by or under this

Act and includes a weighing or measuring instrument.

3. The provisions ofthis Act shall have effect ilOtwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.

CHAPTER II

STANDARD WEIGHTS AND i'vlEASURES

4. Every unit ofweight or measure shall be in accordance with the metric system based

on the international system of units.

5. (1) The base unit of -

(i) length shall be the metre;

(ii) mass shall be the kilogram;

Uii) time shall be the second;

(iv) electric current shall be the ampere;

(v) thermodynamic temperature shall be the kelvin;

(vi)

luminous intensity shall be the candela; and

(vii) amount of substance shall be the mole.

Base
unit
numeration.

of

Standard

units

of weights
measures.

and

(2) The specifications of the base units mentioned in sub-section (1), derived units

and other units shall be such as may be prescribed.

6: (1)The base unit of numeration shall be the unit of the international

form oflndian

numerals.

(2) Every numeration shall be made in accordance with the decimal system.

(3) The decimal multiples

and sub-multiples

of the numerals

shall be of such

denominations and be written in such manner as may be prescribed.

7. (1) The base units of weights and measures sp'ecified in section 5 shall be the

standard units of weights and measures.

(2) The base unit of numeration specified in section 6 shall be the standard unit of

numeration.

(3) For the purpose of deriving the value of base, derived and other units mentioned in
section 5, the Central Government shall prepare or cause to be prepared objects or equipments
in such manner as may be prescribed.

(4) The physical characteristics,

configuration,

constructional

details, materials,

equipments, performance,
tests shall be such as may be prescribed.

tolerances, period of re-verification, methods or procedures of

Standard

wcight,
measure
numeral.

or

8. (1) Any weight or measure which conforms to the standard unit of such weight or
measure and also conforms to such of the provisions of section 7 as are applicable to it shall
be the standard weight or measure.

SEC.

J]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

5

(2) Any numeral which conforms to the provisions of section 6 shall be the standard

numeral.

.

(3) No weight, measure or numeral, other than the standard weight, measure or numeral,

shall be used as a standard weight, measure or numeral.

\

(4) No weight or measure, shall be manufactured or imported unless it conforms to the

standards of weight or measure specified under section 8:

Provided that provisions

of this section shall not apply for n:ianufacture done

exclusively for export or for the purpose of any scientific investigation or research.

9. (I) The reference stanpards, secondary standards and working standards of weights

and measures shall be such as may be prescribed.

(2) Every reference standard, secondary standard and working standard shall be verified

and stamped in such manner and after payment of such fee as may be prescribed.

(3) Every reference standard, secondary standard and working standard which is not
verified and stamped in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) shall not be
deemed to be a valid standard.

10. Any transaction, dealing or contract

in respect of any goods, class of goods or

undertakings shall be made by such weight, measure or number as may be prescribed.

11. (I) No person shall, in relation to any goods,

things or service,-

«(I) quote, or make announcement of, whether by word of mouth or otherwise,

any price or charge, or

(b) issue or exhibit any price list, invoice, cash memo or other document, or

(c) prepare or publish any advertisement, poster or other document, or

(d) indicate the net quantity ofa pre-packaged commodity, or

(e) express in relation to any transaction or protection, any quantity or dimension,

otherwise than in accordance with the standard unit of weight, measure or numeration.

(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not be applicable for export of any goods,

things or service.

12. Any custom, usage, practice or method of whatever nature which permits a person
to demand, receive or cause to be demanded or received, any quantity of article,
thing or
service in excess of or less than, the quantity specified by weight, measure or number in the
contract or other agreement

in relation to the said article, thing or service, shall be void.

ApPOINTMENT

AND POWERS OF DIRECTOR,

CONTROLLER

AND LEGAL METROLOGY

OFFICERS

CHAPTER III

\

~\I

Reference,
ondary
working
dard.

sec 
and
stan 

Use of weight
for
or measure

particular

pur 

pose.s.

Prohibition

of

quotation,
otherwise
in
standard

terms

etc.,
than
of
units

weight,

of
measure
n ull1cration.

or

Any custom,
lIsage, etc ..
contrary
to
standard weight,
measure
numeration
be void.

or

to

13.

(I) The Central Government may, by notification,

appoint a Director of legal
metrology, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Din~ctor and other
employees
for exercising the powers and discharging the duties confer~ed or imposed on
them by or under this Act in relation to inter-State trade and commerce.

(2) The qualifications of the Director and legal metrology officers appointed under

sub-section (I)

shall be such as may be prescribed ..

(3) The Director and every legal metrology officer, appoint~d under sub-section (I),
. shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions in respect of such local limits as the

Central Government may, by notification, specify.

(4) Every legal metrology officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise powers
and discharge duties under the general superintendence, direction and control ofthe Director.

Appointment
of Director,
legal
metrology
ofllcers
other

and

employees

..

6

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART Il-

(5) The Director, the Controller and every legal metrology officer authorised to perform
.. any duty by or under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of

section 2] of the Indian Penal Code.

45 of 1860.

(6) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shalLlie against

the
Controller and legal metrology officer authorised to perform any duty by or under this Act in
respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder.

the Director,

(7) The Central Government may, with the consent of the State Government and subject
to such conditions,
limitations and restrictions as it may specifY in this behalf, delegate such
of the powers of the Director under this Act as it may think fit to the Controller of legal
it is necessary or
metrology in the State, and such Controller may, if he is of opinion that
expedient
in the public interest so to do, delegate such of the powers delegated to him as he
may think fit to any legal metrology officer and where any such delegation of powers is made
by such Controller,
the person to whom. such powers are delegated shall exercise those
powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they had been conferred on him
directly by this Act and not by way of delegation.

(8) Where any delegation of powers is made under sub-section (7), the powers so
delegated shall be exercised under the general superintendence, direction and guidance of
the Director.

. 14. (1) The State Government may, by notification,

of legal
metrology, Additional Controller, Joint Controller, Deputy Controller, Assistant Controller,
Inspector and other employees
for the State for exercising the powers and discharging
the duties conferred
trade and commerce.

or imposed on them by or under this Act

in relation to intra State

appoint a Controller

(2) The qualifications of the Controller and legal metrology officers appointed under

sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.

(3) The Controller and every legal metrology officer, appointed under sub-section (l),
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions in respect of such local limits as the
S~ate Government may, by notification, specifY.

-

(4) Every legal metrology officer-appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise and
discharge the duties under the general superintendence, direction and control of the Controller.

15.

(1) The Director, Controller or any legal metrology officer may, if he has any
reason to believe, whether from any information given to him by any person and taken down
in writing or from persona(knowledg~
that any weight or measure or other
goods in relation to whichany trade and commerce has taken place or is intended to take
. place and in respect of which an offence punishable under this Act appears to have been, or
is likely to be, committed are either kept or concealed in any premises or are in the course of
transportation,-

or otherwise,

(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for and
inspect any weight, measure or other goods in relation to which trade and commerce
has taken place, or is intended to take place and any record,"register or other document
relating thereto;

(b) seize any weight, measure or other goods and any record, register or other
document or article which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence indicating
that an offence punishable under this Act has been, or is likely to be, committed in the
course ot~ or in relation to, any trade and commerce.

(2) The Director, Controller or any legal metrology officer may also require the
production of every document or other record relating to the weight or measure referred to in
sub-section (1) and the person having the custody of such weight or measure shall comply
with such requisition.

Appointment
of Controller,

legal
metrology
otficers
other

and

employees.

Power

of

inspection,
seizllre,

etc.

SEe. 1]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

7

(3) Where any goods seized under sub-section (1) are subject

to speedy or natural
decay, the Director, Controller or legal metrology officer may dispose of such goods in such
manner as may be prescribed.

2 of 1974.

(4) Every search or seizure made under this section shall be carried out in accordance
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to searches and seizures.

16. (1) Every non-standard or unverified weight or measure, and every package made
in contravention of section 18, used in the course of, or in relation to, any trade and commerce
and seized under section 15, shall be liable to be forfeited to the State Government~

Forfeiture.

. Provided that such unverified weight or measure shall not be forfeited to the State
if the person from whom such weight or measure was seized gets the· same

Government
verified and starnped within such time as may be prescribed.

(2) Every weight, measure or other goods seized under section 15 but not forfeited
under sub-section (1), shall be disposed of by such authority and in such manner as may be
prescribed.

17. (1) Every manufacturer, repairer or dealer of weight or measure shall maintain such

Manufac 

records and registers as may be prescribed.

(2) The records and registers maintained under sub-section (1) shall be produced at
the time of inspection to the persons authorised for the said purpose under sub-section (1)
of section 15.

18. (1) No person shall manufacture, pack, sell, import, distribute, deliver, offer, expose
or possess for sale any pre-packaged commodity unless such package is in such standard
quantities or number and bears thereon such declarations and particulars in such manner as
may be prescribed.

(2) Any advertisement mentioning the retail sale price of a pre-packaged commodity
shall contain a declaration as to the net quantity or number of the commodity contained in
the package in such form and manner as may be prescribed.

19. No person shall

import any weight or measure unless he is registered with the

Director

in such manner and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed.

. 20. No weight or ineasure, whether singly or as a part or component of any machine
shall be imported unless it conforms to the standards of weight or measure established by or
under this Act.

21.

(1) For imparting training in Legal Metrology and other allied branches of
the "!ndian Institute of Legal Metrology"
referred to as the
knowledge
"Institute")
established under the provisions of the Standards of Weights and Measures
Act, 1976, shall be deemed to have been established under the corresponding provisions of
this Act.

.(hereinafter

60 of 1976.

etc.,

to

turers.
maintain
records

and

registers.

Declarations

on pre 
packaged
cOITImodities.

RegIstration
for
·importer
of weight or
measurc .

Non-standard

weights
measures

and
not

to be imported.

ill

Training
Legal
Metrology.

(2) The management

the teaching staff and other
employees,
the qualification·s, which a person
shall possess in order to be eligible for admission thereto shall be such as may be prescribed.

the courses and curricula for training thereat,

and control of the Institute,

22. Every person, before manufacturing or importing any weight or measure shalf seek
the approval of model of such weight or measure in such manner, on payment of such fee and
from such authority as may be prescribed:

Approval
modcl.

of

Provided that such approval of model may not be required in respect of any cast iron,
length measures (not being measuring
brass, bullion, or carat weight or any beam scale,
trade for measuring textiles or timber, capacity
tapes) which are ordinarily used in retail
measures, not exceeding twenty litre in capacity, which are ordinarily used in retail trade for
measuring kerosene, milk or potable liquors:

8

THE .GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II-

Provided further that the prescribed authority may, if he is satisfied that the model of
any weight or measure which has been approved in a country outside India conforms to the
standards established by or under this Act, approve such model without any test or after
such test as he may deem fit.

23. (1) No person shall man~facture, repair or sell, or offer, expose or possess for repair
or sale, any weight or measure unless he holds a licence issued by the Controller under sub 
.section (2):

Provided that no licence to repair shall be required by a manufacturer
own weight or measure in a State other than the State of manufacture of the same.

for repair of his

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Controller shall issue a licence in such form
and manner, on such conditions, for such period and such area of jurisdiction and on payment
of such fee as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER IV

VERIFICATION

AND STAMPING OF WEIGHT OR MEASURE

24. (1) Every person having any weight or measure in his possession, custody or
indicating that such weight or measure is being, or is intended or is
in circumstances
control
likely to be, used by him in any transaction or for protection,
shall, before putting such
weight or measure into such use, have such weight or measure verified at such place and
during such hours as the Controller may, by general or special order, specifY in this behalf, on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed.

(2) The Central Government may prescribe the kinds of weights and measures for

which the verification is to be done through the Government approved Test Centre.

(3) The Government approved Test Centre.shall be notified by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, in such manner, on such terms and conditions
and on payment of such fee. as may be prescribed.

(4) The Government approved Test Centre shall appoint or engage persons having
such qualifications and experience and collect such fee on such terms and conditions for the
verification of weights and measures specified under sub-section (2) as may be prescribed.

CHAPTER V

OFFENCES

AND PENALTIES

25. Whoever uses or keeps for use any weight or measure or makes use of any numeration
otherwise thmi in accordance with the standards of weight or measure or the standard of
numeration, as the case may be, specified by. or under this Act, shall be punished with fine
which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine.

26. Whoever tampers with, or alters in any way, any reference standard,

secondary
standard or working standard or increases or decreases or alters any weight or measure
with a view to deceiving any person or knowing or having reason to believe that any
person is likely to be deceived thereby, except where such alteration is made for the
shall be punished with fine which
correction of any error noticed therein on verification,
may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second and subsequent offence with
imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
one year or with fine or with both ..

27. Every person who manufactures or causes to be manufactured or sells or offers,

exposes or possesses for sale, any weight or measure which,-

(a) does not conform to the standards of weight or measure specified by or

under this Act; or

(b) which bears thereon any inscription of weight, measure or number which
does not conform to the standards of weight, measure or numeration specified by or
under this Act,

Prohibition

on
manufacture,
repair or sale
of weight or
measure
without
licence.

Verification

and stamping
of weight or,
measure.

Penalty lor use
non 
of

standard weight
or measure.

Penalty
alteration

weight
measure.

for
of

and

Penally
manufacture
sale

of

for
or
non 

standard weight
or measure.

SEC. I]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

9

except where he is permitted to do so under this Act, shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to twenty thousand
offence with
imprisonment

and for the second
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.

or subsequent

rupees

28. Whoever makes any transaction, deal or contract

in contravention of the standards
of weights and measures specified under section 10 shall be punished with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees and for the'second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

29. Whoever violates section 11 shall be punished with fine which mayextehd

ten thousand rupees and, for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

to
for a

30. Whoever-

(a)

in selling any article or thing by weight, measure or number, delivers or
causes to be dclivered to the purchaser any quantity or number of that article or thing
less than the quantity or number contracted for or paid for; or

(b) in rendering any service by weight, measure or number, renders that service

less than the service contracted for or paid for; or

(c) in buying any article or thing by weight, measure or number, fraudulently
receives, or causes to be received any q'uantity or number of that article or thing in
excess of the quantity or number contracted for or paid for; or

Cd) in obtaining any service by weight, measure or number, obtains that service

in excess of the service contracted for or paid for,

shall be punished with fine which may extend to tcn thousand rupees, and; for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both.

Penafty
for
llIaklllg an)'
transacl
ion,
deal or
contract
contraven 
tion of

the

in

prescribed
standards,

for
Penalty
or
quoting
publishing,
ele,
of non-standard
units,

for
in

Penalty
transactions
contravention
of

standard

weight
measurc,

or

31. Whoever, being required by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder
to
submit returns, maintain any record or register, or being required by the Director or the
Controllcr or any legal metrology officer to produce before him for inspection any weight or
measure or any document, register or other record relating thereto, omits or fails without any
reasonable excuse, so to do, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which may
extend to one year and also with fine.

Pcnalty
non 

for

of

production
documcnts,
elc,

32. Whoever

fails or omits to submit model of any weight or measure for approval,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for the second
or subsequent offelice, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and also
with fine.

for

Penalty
failure to gel
model

approved.

33. Whoever, sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise transfers or uses any unverified
weight or measure shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than two thousand
rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees and, for the second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment

for a terin which may extend'to one year and also with fine.

34. Whoever sells, or causes to be sold, delivers, or causes to be delivered, any commodity,
article or thing by any means other than the standard weight or measure or number, shall be
punished with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to
five thousand rupees and, for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both.

Penalty for use
unverified
of

weight
measure.

or

Penijlty
sale or

for

delivery
of
commodities,
ctc,. by nOI1 
standard

weight or
measure.

for

Pcnalty
rendering
services
by
non-standard

wcight.
measure
number.

or

Pcnalty
selling,
non-standard

for
etc., of

packages.

Penalty
contraven 

for

tion by
Government

approved
Centre.

Tcst

Pcnalty
non 

for

by

of

registration
importer
weight or
measure

for
Penalty
import of
lIon 
standard weight
or measure.

for

Penalty
obstructing
Director,
Controller

or

legal
metrology
officer.

Penalty
giving
information
false return.

for
false
or

10

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II-

35. Whoever renders or causes to be rendered, any service through means other than
the weight or measure or numeration or in terms of any weight, measure or number other than
the standard weight or measure, shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than
two thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisC?nment for a term which shall not be less than three months
but which inay extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

36. (I) Whoever manufactures, packs, imports, sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise
transfers, offers, exposes or possesses for sale, or causes to be sold, distributed, delivered or
otherwise transferred, offered, exposed for sale any pre-packaged commodity which does
not conform to the declarations on the package as provided in this Act, shall be punished
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, for the second offence, with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the subsequent offence, with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees or with
imprisonment

for a term which may extend to one year or with both.

(2) Whoever manufactures or packs or imports or causes to be manufactured or packed
or imported, any pre-packaged commodity, with error in pet quantity as may be prescribed
shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second and subsequent offence, with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year
or with both.

37. (I) Where any Government approved Test Centre contravenes any of the provisions
ofthisAct or the rules made thereunder, or the conditions of the licence, it shall be punished
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.

(2) Where any owner or employee ofa Government Approved Test Centre performing
duties in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, wilfully
verifies or stamps any weight or measure in contravention of the provisions ofthis Act or the
rules made thereunder,
be punishable with
for every such contravention,
imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both.

he shall,

38. Whoever imports any weight or measure without being registered under this Act
shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for the
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine, or with both.

39. Whoever

imports any non-standard weight or measure shall be punished with
fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence,
with imprisonment

for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine.

40. Whoever obstructs the Director, the Controller or ar.: . ;gal metrology officer with
intent to prevent or deter the Director or the Controller or any legal metrology officer from
exercising his powers or discharging his functions, or in consequence of anything done or
attempted to be done by the Director or the Controller or any legal metrology officer in the
lawful exercise of his powers or discharge of his functions as such, or whoever obstructs the
entry of the Director or the Controller or any legal metrology officer into any premises for
inspection and verification of any weight or measure or any document or record relating
thereto or the net contents of any packaged commodity or for any other purpose shall be
for a term which may extend to two years and for the second or
punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years.
subsequent offence, with imprisonment

41. (I) Whoever gives any information to the Director,

the Controller or any legal
metrology ofticer, which he may require or ask for in the course of his duty, and which such
person either knows or has reason to believe to be false, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to five thousand
offence with
imprisonment

rupees and for the second or subsequent
for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine.

(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act so to do, submits a return or maintains
any record or register which is false in 111aterialparticulars, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to. five thousand
offence, with
imprisonment

for a term which may extend to one year and also with fine.

rupees and for the second or subsequent

-

for
in

SEC. I]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

!I

42. The Director, the ControHer or any legal metrology officer, exercising powers under
this Act or any rule made thereunder, who knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so
doing, and yet-

Vexatious
search.

(a) searches, or causes to be searched, any house, conveyance or place; or

(b) searches any person; or

(c) seizes any weight; measure or other movable property;

shaH, for every such offence, be punished with imprisonment
one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.

for a term which may extend to

43. Where the Controller or any legal nletrology officer exercising powers under this
in
Act or any rule made thereunder, wilfuHy verities or stamps any weight or measure,
contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, he shall, for every
such offence, be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.

Penalty
verification
contravention
of
rules.

Act

and

44. (1) Whoever-

(i) counterfeits

any seal specified by or under this Act or the rules made

thereunder, or

for
Penalty
counterfeiting
or seals. etc.

(ii) seIls or otherwise disposes of any counterfeit seal, or

(iii) possesses any counterfeit

seal, or

(iv) counterfeits or removes or tampers with any stamp, specified by or under

this Act or rules made thereunder, or

(v) affixes the stamp so removed on, or inserts the same into, any other weight

or measure,

shaH be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to tive years.

45 of 1860.

Explanation.-In this sub-section,
it in section 28 of the Indian Penal Code.

"counterfeit"

shall have the meaning assigned to

(2) Whoever obtains, by unlawful means, any seal specified by or under this Act or the
rules made thereunder and uses, or'eauses to be used, any such seal for making any stamp
on any weight or measure with a vi~':Vto representing that the stamp made by such seal is
autl10rised by or under
shall be punished with
this Act or the rules made thereunder
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one
imprisonment
year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which shall not
be less than six months hut which may extend to five years.

(3) Whoever, being in lawful possession ofa seal specified by or under this Act or the
rules made thereunder, uses, or causes to be used, such seal without any lawful authority for
such use, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six
months but which may extend to one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five
years.

(4) Whoever sells or offers or exposes for sale or otherwise disposes of any weight or
measure which, he knows or has reason to believe, bears thereon a counterfeit stamp, shall
for a term which shall not be less than six months but which
be punished with imprisonment
for a
may extend to one year and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to five years.

45. Whoever, being required to obtain a licence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder, manufactures, without being in possession of a valid licence, any weight or
measure, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for
the second or subsequent offence; with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine, or with both.

Penalty
for
manufacture

of weight and
l1Ieas lire
without
licence.

I

Penally

Un

repair, sale,
etc., of weight
and mcasure
without
liccncc.

•

Pcnalty
for
tampering with
liccnce.

Compound
of offenceS.

ing

by
Offcnces
and
companies
powcr or court
to
pu bl ish
namc, place of
ctc.,
busincss,

for companies
convicted.

12

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[P ART 11---

46. Whoever, being required to obtain " licence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder
repairs or sells or offers, exposes or possesses for repair or sale, any weight or
measure, without being in possession of a valid licence, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to five thousand
offence, with.
imprisonment

for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.

rupees and for the second or subsequent

47. Whoever alters or otherwise tampers, with any licence issued or renewed under
this Act or rules made thereunder, otherwise than in accordance with any authorisation made

by the Controller
thousand rupees, or with imprisonment

in this behalf, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty
for a term which may extend to one year or with both.

48. (I) Any offence punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 39, sections 45 to 47,
or any rule made under sub-section (3) of section 52 may, either before or after the institution
ofthe prosecution, be compounded, on payment for credit to the Government of such sum as
may be prescribed.

(2) The Director or legal metrology officer as may be specially authorised by him in this
section 25, sections 27 to 39, or any rule

behalf, may compound offencespunishable.under
made under sub-section (3) of section 52.

(3) The Controller or legal metrology officer specially authorised by him, may compound
offences punishable under section 25, sections 27 to 31, sections 33 to 37, sections 45 to 47,
and any rule made under sub-section (3) of section 52:

Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount ofthe fine,

\vhich may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded.

(4) Nothing in sub-section (I) shall apply to person who commits the same or similar
offence, within a period of three years from the date on which the first offence, committed by
him, was compounded.

Explanation.-For

the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent offence
committed after the expiry of a period ofthree years from the date on which the offence was
previously compounded,

shall be deemed to be a first offence.

(5) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (I), no proceeding or
in respect of the

further proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender
offence so compounded.

(6) No offence under this Act shall be compounded except as provided by this section.

49. (I) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,--

(a)

(i) the person, if any, who has been nominated under sub-section (2) to be in
charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company (hereinafter

in this section referred to as a person responsible); or

(ii) where no person has been nominated, every person who at the time the
offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of the business of the company; and

(b) the company,

shall be deemed to be guilty ofthe offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
Iiab Ie to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge and that he exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of
such offence.

(2) Any company may, by order in writing, authorise any of its directors to exercise all
the
such powers and take all such steps as may be necessary or expedient
commission by the company of any offence under this Act and may give notice to the
Director or the concerned Controller or any legal metrology officer authorised in this behalf

to prevent

SEC. I]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

]3

in such
by such Controller
(hereinaller
form and in such manner as may be prescribed,
it has nominated such director as the
person responsible, alongwith the written consent of such director for being so non1inated.

in this section referred to as the authorised officer)

that

,

,

'

Explanation.-Where a company has different establishments or branches or different,
units in any establishment or branch, different persons may be nominated under this sub 
section in relation to different establishments or branches or units and the person nominated
in relation to any establishment, branch or unit shall be deemed to be the person responsible
in respect of such establishment, branch 01: unit.

(3) The person nominated uD'dersub-section (2) shall, until-

(i) further notice cancelling such nomination is received from the company by

the Director or the concerned Controller or the authorised officer; or

(ii) he ceases to be a director of the company; or

(iii) he makes a request

in writing to the Director or the concerned Controller or
the legal metrology officer under intimation to the company, to cancel the nomination,
which request shall be complied with by the Director or the concerned Controller or the
legal metrology officer,

whichever

is the earliest; continue to be the person responsible:

Provided that where such person ceases to be a director of the conipany, he shall
intimate the fact of such cessation to the Director or the concerned Co"ntroller or the authorised
officer:

Provided further that where such person makes a request under clause (iii) the Director
or the concerned Controller or the authorised officer shall not cancel such nomination with
effect from a date earlier than the date on which the request'is made.

anything contained

(4) Notwithstanding

in the foregoing sub-sections, where an
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, cr is attributable to the neglect on
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer, not being a person nominated
under sub-section (2), such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed
to be guilty of that offence and shall be Iiable to be proceeded
against and punished
accordingly.

it shall be competent

(5) Where any company is convicted under this Act for contravention

of any of the
for the court convicting the company to cause the
provisions thereof,
the fact that the
name and place of business of the company, nature of the contravention,
company has been so convicted and such otherparticulars'as
the court may consider to be
appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to be published at the expense ofthe company
in such newspaper or in such other manner as the court may direct.

(6) No publication under sub-section (5)shal!'be made until the period for preferring
the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been

an appeal against
preferred, or such an appeal, having been preferred, has been disposed of.

(7) The expenses of any publication under sub-section (5) shall be recoverable from

the company as if it were a fine imposed by the court.

'

'Explanation.-For

the purposes of this section,-

(a) "company" means any body corporate

and includes

a 'firm or other

association of individuals; and

(b) "director",

in relation to a firm, means a partner

in the firm but excludes

nominated directors, honorary directors, Government nominated directors.

50. (1) Subject

to the provisions of sub-section (2),-an appeal shalllie,-

Appeals,

(a) from every decision or order under sections 15 to 20, section 22, section 25,
sections 27 to 39, section 41 or any rule made under sub-section (3) of section 52 by
the legal metrology officer appointed under section ]3, to the Director;

14

THE GAZETTE Of

INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART II-

(b) from every decision or order made by the Director ofLegaJ Metrology under
sections 15 to 20, section 22, section 25, sections 27 ~o39, section 4 J or any rule made
under sub-section (3) of section 52, to the Central Government or any officer specially
authorised in this behalf by that Government;

(c) fi'om every decision given by the Controller of Legal Mett:ology under delegated

powers of Director Legal Metrology to the Central Government;

(d) from every decision given or order made under sections 15 to 18, sections
23 to 25, sections 27 to 37, sections 45 to 47 or any rule made under sub-section (3) of
section 52 by any legal metrology officer appointed under section 14, to the Controller;
and

(e) from every decision given or Ol:dermade by the Controller under sections 15
to 18, sections 23 to 25, sections 27 to 37, sections 45 to 47 or any rule made under sub 
section (3) of section 52 not being an order made in appeal under clause (d), to the
State Government or any officer specially authorised in this behalfby that Government.

(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within sixty days from the date on which the

impugned order was made:

Provided that

the appellant was
the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that
prevented by sufficient cause·fi·om preferring the appeal within the said period of sixty days,
permit the appellant

to prefer the appeal within a further period of sixty days.

(3) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority shall, after giving the parties
to the appeal, a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as it
deems proper, make such order, as it may think fit, confirming, modifYing or reversing the
decision or order appealed against or may send back the case with such direction as it may
think fit for a fresh decision or order after taking additional evidence,

if necessary.

(4) Every appeal shall be preferred on payment of such fees, as may be pri?scribed.

(5) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may on its
own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the record of any proceeding including a
for the purpose of
proceeding in appeal
satisfYing itself as to the correctness,
legality or propriety of such decision or.order and may
pass such orders thereon as it may think fit:

in which any decision or order has been made,

.

of

Provisions
Iud iau Penal
Code and
Code of
Criminal
Proced ure

to apply.,
the

not
Powcr of
Central
Govcrnmcnt
to makc rulcs.

Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under this sub-section so as to

prejudicially affect any person unless such person has been given a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause against

the proposed action.

51. The provisions of the Indian Penal Code and section 153 of the Code of Criminal
relate to offences with regard to weight or

Procedure, 1973 in so far as such provisions
measure, shall not apply to any offence which is punishable under this Act.

45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

52. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the

provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality ofthe foregoing power, such

rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-

(a) the specification of the base units of measures and base unit of mass under

sub-section (2) of section 5;

(b) the manner of preparation of objects and equipments under sub-section (3)

of section 7;

(c) physical characteristics,

details, materials,
tolerances, period ofre-verification, methods or procedures

constructional

configuration,

equipment, performance,
of tests under sub-section (4) of section 7;

(d) reference standards, secondary standards and working standards of weights

and measures under sub-section (1) of section 9;

SEC. I]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

15

(e) reference

standards,

secondary

verified

and stamped

and the fee under

standards
sub-section

and working
(2) of section

standards
9;

shall be

if) the weight or measure or number

in respect
section

10;

of any goods,

class

of

in which any transaction,
or undertakings

goods

dealing, or contract
under

be made

shall

(g) the qualifications
13;

(2) of section

section

of the Director

and legal metrology

officers

under

sub 

(h) the qualification

of

the Controller

and legal metrology

officers

under

sub 

section

(2) of section 14;

(i) the manner

of disposal

of goods under

sub-section

(3) of section

15;

U)'thc standard
the declarations

quantities
and the particulars

or number

and the manner
sub-section

under

bear

in which the packages

shall

(1) of section

18;

(k) the manner

and registration

and the fee under

section

19;

(!) the management

and control

of the Institute,

the teaching

the courses

employees,
person shall possess
of section 21 ;

and curricula

for training

thereat,

the qualifications,

in order

to be eligible

for admission

thereto under

staff and other
which a
(2)

sub-section
.

(m) the manner,

fee and authority

for approval

of models under

section 22;

(n) the kinds of weights

or measures

tinder

sub-section

(2) of section

24;

(0) the manner
in which,
the Central, Government

which

and conditions

terms
shall notify the Government

on which and fee on payment
Test Centre

approved

under

sub'-section

(3) of section 24;

(P) the qualifications

and experience

of persons

appointed

fee and terms and conditions
the weight or measure

under

on which.Government
sub-section

(4) of section

24;

approved Test Centre

or engaged

and the
shall verify

(q) the error

in net quantity

under

sub-section

(2) of section

36;

(I') fee for compounding

of offence under

sub-section

(1) of section

48;

(s) form and manner

in which notice to the Director or the Controller

or any other

officer

authorised

by him shall be given under

sub-section

(2) of section 49.

"

(3) In making any rule under, this section,

the Central Government may provide

that a

breach thereof

shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand

rupees.

(4) Every rule made by the Central Government

under

each House of Parliament, while

this Act shall be laid, as soon as
for a total

it is in session,

may be after
it is made, before
period of thirty days which may be comprised
sessions,
successive
both Houses
in such modified

the expiry of the session
agree
both Houses
the rule should not be made,

form or be of no effect,

and if, before

agree that

aforesaid,

sessions

in one session
immediately
in making

or in two or more successive
following
any modification

the session

or the
in the rule or
have effect only
that any such

the rule shall

thereafter

as the case may be; so, however,.

modification
done under

or annulment
rule.

that

shall be without prejudice

to the v<:tlidity of anything

previously

53. (1) The State Government may, by notification,
the provisions

Central Government, make rules to carry out

and after consultation
of this Act.

with the

(2) In particular

prejudice

to the generality

of the foregoing

power,

such

rules may provide

following matters,

namely:-

.

and without
for all or any ofthe

(a)

the time within which the weight

or n1easure may be got verified

under

provsio

to sub-section

(1) of section

16;

(b)

registers
(1) of section

section

17;

and records

to be maintained

by persons

referred

to under sub 

(c) the form, manner, conditions,
sub-section

of licence under

(2) of section 23;

period,

area of jurisdiction

and fees for issuance

Power of
State
Govcrnmcnt
to make rules.

16

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

[PART Il-

(d)

fee for verification
sub-section (I) of section 24;

and stamping

of any weight or measure

under

(e) manner ofnotitying Government approved Test Centre, terms and conditions

and fee to be paid under sub-section (3) of section 24;

(j) fee for compounding of offences under sub-section (I) of section 48.

(3) In making any rule under this section,

the State Government may provide that a

breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees .

.

,

(4) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the condition of the

rules being made after previous publication in Official Gazette.

(5) Every rule made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of State Legislature, where there are two Houses and where there is one
House of State Legislature, before that House.

Delegation
Powers.

of

54. (I) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government and
by notification, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or any rule made there 
under, not being a power conferred by section 50 relating to appeal or section 52 relating to
to such conditions as may be
power to make rules,
specified, may be exercised also by such officer subordinate to it as may be specified in the
notification.

in relation to such matters and subject

(2) Subject

to any general or special direction or condition imposed by the State
to exercise any powers may
in the same manner and to the same extent as if they had been

Government, any person authorised by the Central Government
exercise those powers
conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of delegation ..

Act not

to

apply
certain

in

cases.

55. The provisions of this Act, in so far as they relate to verification and stamping of

weights and measures, shall not apply to any weight or measure,-

(a) used in any factory exclusively engaged in the manufacture of any anns,

ammunition or both, for the use ofthe Armed Forces of the Union;

( b) used for scientific investigation or for research;

.

(c) manufactured exclusively for export.

56.

(I) Evety Director, Controller and legal metrology officer appointed immediately
before the commencement of the rules made under this Act, shall be deemed to have been

appointed under sub-section (1) of sections 13 and 14, notwithstanding any rule prescribing
different qualifications.

(2) The rules made by a State Government under the Standards of Weights and
Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985 which are in force immediately before the commencement
of this Act shall remain in force until the State Government, makes rules in that behalf.

54 of 1985.

57. (I) The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and the Standards of

60 of 1976.

Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985, is hereby repealed.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897,
rule or order made under the Standards of Weights

with respect to repeals, any notification,
and Measures Act, 1976 and the Standards of Weights and Measures
Act, 1985, shall, if in force, at the commencement ofthis Act, continue to be in force and have
effect as if it was made under the corresponding provision ofthis Act.

(Enforcement)

54 of 1985.

10 of 1897.

60 of 1976.

54 of 1985.

Existing
Director,
Controller

and .legal
metrology
officer

not

be affected
the new

qualification·
to he

prescribed.

to

by

Repeal of the
Standards

of

Weights
Measures
1976 and
Standards

and

I\et,

of

Weights
Measures·

and

(Enforcement)
Act,

1985.

SEC. I]

THE GAZETTE OF- INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

17

(3) Notwithstanding

such repeal, any appointment,

notification,

rule, order,

licence,

certificate,

notice,

decision,

approval,

authorisation

or consent made,

registration,
issued

or

given under

such law shall,

if in force at the commencement

of this Act, continue

to be in

force and have effect as if it were made,
of this Act.

issued or given under

the corresponding

provisions

V. K. BHASIN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.

PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI

AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER

OF PUBLICATIONS,

DELHI~201O.

GMGIPMRND-114GI(S5)-22-01-2010.

